.\" ############################################################################
.\" ### /usr/local/share/man/man1/vmdown.1.gz BEGIN
.\" ############################################################################
.\"
.\" Copyright 2017 WhiteWinterWolf (www.whitewinterwolf.com)
.\"
.\" This file is part of vmtools.
.\"
.\" vmtools is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" ############################################################################
.
.Dd June 3, 2017
.Dt VMDOWN 1
.Os vmtools
.
.
.Sh NAME
.
.Nm vmdown
.Nd shutdown a Qemu virtual machine
.
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.
.Nm
.Op Fl kstw
.Op Ar vmhome_path ...
.
.Nm
.Op Fl kstw
.Fl a
.
.Nm
.Op Fl kstw
.Fl p Ar pid ...
.
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.
Shutdown selected virtual machines using the selected method.
.Pp
See
.Sx OPTIONS
below for more details on the virtual machines and shutdown methods selection.
.
.
.Sh OPTIONS
.
.Ss Virtual machines selection options
.
The virtual machines selection options are as follows:
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.
.It Fl a
Shutdown all running virtual machines.
.It Fl p Ar pid ...
Shutdown the virtual machine running with the PID
.Ar pid .
.El
.Pp
The default is to shutdown the virtual machine designated by the home directory
.Ar vmhome_path .
If no home directory is provided, the current working directory is used.
.
.Ss Shutdown methods selection options
.
The shutdown methods selection options are as follows:
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl k
Kill the virtual machine process (send a SIGKILL to the Qemu process).
.br
This is the most brutal way to shutdown a virtual machine.
The host operating system immediatly terminates the Qemu hypervisor process.
It should only be used against stuck Qemu hypervisor processes.
.It Fl s
Send an ACPI shutdown request to the virtual machine guest.
.br
This is cleanest way to shutdown a virtual machine as it allows the guest
operating system and the application it runs to gracefully close themselves.
However, the guest operating system must be able to handle ACPI events for this
method to have any effect.
In particular, this won't work against legacy or stuck guest operating systems.
.It Fl t
Terminate the virtual machine process (send a SIGTERM to the Qemu process).
.br
The Qemu hypervisor process immediatly terminates the guest operating system,
but will still ensure that from the hypervisor side all pending data gets
correclly flushed and all opened resources gets closed correctly.
.br
This shutdown method however leaves no way for the guest's operating system and
application to save their data, it should be used only against either legacy
and stucked guests which do not respond to ACPI shutdown requests, or
against stateless guests (vitual machines in read-only or snapshot mode).
.El
.Pp
The default is to try every shutdown method (equivalent to
.Fl kst ) .
.Pp
When several methods are selected,
.Fl w
is assumed and the methods are always processed in the following order,
independantly of the flags order in the command-line:
.
.Bl -enum -width Ds -offset indent
.It
If
.Fl s
is enabled, send an ACPI shutdown request to the guests of all selected
processes.
.It
If
.Fl t
is enabled, send a SIGTERM signal to the selected processes still running.
.It
If
.Fl k
is enabled, send a SIGKILL signal to the selected processes still running.
.El
.
.Ss Other options
.
The other options are as follows:
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h
Show usage information summary then exit.
.
.It Fl q
Decrease verbosity.
Add several
.Fl q
options to decrease verbosity even more
.Fl ( qq
by default to get minimal output).
See
.Xr vmtools.conf 5
for more information about verbosity levels.
.Pp
See
.Fl v
to increase the verbosity level.
.
.It Fl v
Increase verbosity.
Add several
.Fl v
options to increase verbosity even more
.Fl ( vvv
by default to get the most verbose output, including debugging messages).
See
.Xr vmtools.conf 5
for more information about verbosity levels.
.Pp
See
.Fl q
to decrease the verbosity level.
.
.It Fl w
Wait for the virtual machine to terminate before proceeding.
The wait ends when all selected virtual machines have stopped or after the
.Cm vm_qemu_shutdown_timeout
timer expired (20 seconds by default, see
.Xr vmtools.conf 5 ) ,
whichever happens first.
.Pp
This flag is automatically enabled when several shutdown methods are selected.
In this case
.Nm
waits between each selected shutdown method and after the last one.
.El
.
.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev TMPDIR
Default location to store temporary files, by default
.Pa /tmp .
.
.It Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Location of user's configuration files, by default
.Pa ~/.config .
.El
.
.
.Sh FILES
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /usr/local/lib/vmtools
Libraries shared by the vmtools project utilities.
.It Pa /usr/local/share/vmtools/vmtools.conf
Virtual machine default settings, see
.Xr vmtools.conf 5 .
.El
.Pp
Moreover, the content of
.Pa /usr/local/share/vmtools
can be overridden in the following locations (in the order of precedence):
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It ~/.config/vmtools
User overrides (if
.Cm cfg_include_userhome
is set to
.Dq yes ) .
.It /etc/vmtools
System-wide overrides.
.El
.
.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.
.Bl -tag -compact -width Ds
.
.It 0
Success: all selected virtual machines have been shut down.
.It 1
An error occurred, more information is available on the error output.
.It 2
Wrong usage, nothing has been done.
.It 3
Partial success: some virtual machines may have been shutdown.
.El
.
.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.
.Bl -inset
.It Example 1:
Shutdown the current virtual machine:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
.Ic cd ~/my-vm
.Ic vmdown
.Ed
.Pp
.It Example 2:
Shutdown all running virtual machines (particularly useful in a
system shutdown script):
.Pp
.Dl Ic vmdown -a
.Pp
.It Example 3:
Quickly stop the virtual machine bearing a certain PID:
.Pp
.Dl Ic vmdown -tk -p 1234
.Pp
.El
.
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.
.Xr vmps 1 ,
.Xr vmup 1 ,
.Xr vmtools 7
.
.
.Sh CAVEATS
.
The ACPI-based guest shutdown requires
.Xr socat 1
to be available on the host system and the virtual machine to have a monitor
file (the virtual machine typically needs a home directory for this).
This functionality will not work and will raise an appropriate warning message
if these prerequisites are not fulfilled (witout impact on any other shutdown
method selected).
.Pp
This limitation is not very damaging as it mostly affects HDD-less guests
started from live-CDs, which usually do not mind being brutally shut down
anyway.
.Pp
This limitation is caused by Qemu.
A feature request has been opened
.Lk https://bugs.launchpad.net/qemu/+bug/1217339 "upstream" .
.
.
.Sh REPORTING BUGS
.
Please send bug reports to the
.Lk http://github.com/WhiteWinterWolf/vmtools/issues "vmtools issues page" .
.
.\" ############################################################################
.\" ### /usr/local/share/man/man1/vmdown.1.gz END
.\" ############################################################################
