.\" ############################################################################
.\" ### /usr/local/share/man/man1/vminfo.1.gz BEGIN
.\" ############################################################################
.\"
.\" Copyright 2017 WhiteWinterWolf (www.whitewinterwolf.com)
.\"
.\" This file is part of vmtools.
.\"
.\" vmtools is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" ############################################################################
.
.Dd June 3, 2017
.Dt VMINFO 1
.Os vmtools
.
.
.Sh NAME
.
.Nm vminfo
.Nd report information on a virtual machine
.
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.
.Nm
.Op Fl abhilqstvy
.Op Ar vmhome_path ...
.
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.
Report various information on a virtual machine.
.Pp
The various type of information available is described in
.Sx Category selection options
below.
If no category option is provided,
.Fl itsb
is assumed.
.Pp
.Ar vmhome_path
must be a valid virtual machine home directory.
If no value is provided, the current working directory is assumed.
.
.
.Sh OPTIONS
.
.Ss Category selection options
.
The category selection options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl b
Display storage backend information.
.Pp
List all enabled storage devices.
.Pp
If the device is associated to a backend file, outputs its path, and if this
path points to a local file display information about the file type as detected
by the
.Xr file 1
utility.
.Pp
The long output differs only for local files: more technical information is
displayed regarding the file content, including the display of the complete
backing chain for QCow2 files.
.
.It Fl i
Display general information.
.Pp
By default the virtual machine name, its status (running or not) and if it
is running the PID associated to it are displayed.
.Pp
The long output also adds the number of parent (either 0 or 1) and childs, the
type of display used (and the associated URL if applicable), the path to the
Qemu monitor socket file, the user owner of the Qemu process and resource
consumption information (memory, CPU and disk space).
.Pp
See also the
.Xr vmps 1
command to get information on currently running virtual machines.
.
.It Fl s
Display virtual machine settings.
.Pp
Outputs all virtual machine settings applied.
The short output only displays settings directly set in the virtual machine
settings file or inherited from ancestors, it does not include default settings.
.Pp
The long output completes the short output with the default value of all
available virtual machine settings and
.Xr vmtools 7
settings.
.Pp
For more information on a particular setting entry, see
.Xr vmtools.conf 5 .
.
.It Fl t
Display virtual machines forks tree.
.Pp
Display the complete virtual machines forks tree to which the current virtual
machine belongs.
The name of each virtual machine is displayed, as well as its current status:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width R -offset indent -compact
.It Cm *
Current virtual machine.
.It Cm R
Running virtual machines.
.El
.Pp
The long output adds the path to the home directory of each virtual machine.
.Pp
By default the tree uses UTF-8 characters for its formatting, see
.Fl a
if this behavior is undesirable.
.El
.
.Ss Other options
.
The other options are as follows:
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.
.It Fl a
Use ASCII characters for formatting purpose instead of UTF-8.
.Pp
Currently this option has an effect only if the virtual machines forks tree
output
.Fl ( t )
is enabled, other information categories do not use any UTF-8 formatting
character.
.
.It Fl h
Show usage information summary then exit.
.
.It Fl l
Enables long output.
.Pp
The exact effect depends on the enabled information categories.
See
.Sx Category selection options
for a description of the effect of enabling the long output on each information
category.
.Pp
This option must not be mistaken with
.Fl v
which enables messages mainly used for debugging purposes.
.
.It Fl q
Decrease verbosity.
Add several
.Fl q
options to decrease verbosity even more
.Fl ( qq
by default to get minimal output).
See
.Xr vmtools.conf 5
for more information about verbosity levels.
.Pp
See
.Fl v
to increase the verbosity level.
.
.It Fl v
Increase verbosity.
Add several
.Fl v
options to increase verbosity even more
.Fl ( vvv
by default to get the most verbose output, including debugging messages).
See
.Xr vmtools.conf 5
for more information about verbosity levels.
.Pp
See
.Fl q
to decrease the verbosity level.
.Pp
This option must not be mistaken with the
.Fl l
option.
.
.It Fl y
Don't ask any question: accept all confirmation requests and automatically
select the default answer in any other situation.
.Pp
Use this option with
.Em great care :
no confirmation will be asked before deleting or overwriting any files!
.El
.
.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev TMPDIR
Default location to store temporary files, by default
.Pa /tmp .
.
.It Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Location of user's configuration files, by default
.Pa ~/.config .
.El
.
.
.Sh FILES
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /usr/local/lib/vmtools
Libraries shared by the vmtools project utilities.
.It Pa /usr/local/share/vmtools/vmtools.conf
Virtual machine default settings, see
.Xr vmtools.conf 5 .
.El
.Pp
Moreover, the content of
.Pa /usr/local/share/vmtools
can be overridden in the following locations (in the order of precedence):
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It ~/.config/vmtools
User overrides (if
.Cm cfg_include_userhome
is set to
.Dq yes ) .
.It /etc/vmtools
System-wide overrides.
.El
.
.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.
.Ex -std
.
.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.
.Bl -inset
.It Example 1:
Get an overview of the current virtual machine:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
.Ic cd ~/myVM
.Ic vminfo
.Ed
.Pp
.It Example 2:
Check the structure of a virtual machine tree:
.Pp
.Dl Ic vminfo -tl ~/myVM
.Pp
.El
.
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.
.Xr vmfix 1 ,
.Xr vmps 1 ,
.Xr vmtools 7
.
.
.Sh REPORTING BUGS
.
Please send bug reports to the
.Lk http://github.com/WhiteWinterWolf/vmtools/issues "vmtools issues page" .
.
.\" ############################################################################
.\" ### /usr/local/share/man/man1/vminfo.1.gz END
.\" ############################################################################
