.\" ############################################################################
.\" ### /usr/local/share/man/man1/vmmerge.1.gz BEGIN
.\" ############################################################################
.\"
.\" Copyright 2017 WhiteWinterWolf (www.whitewinterwolf.com)
.\"
.\" This file is part of vmtools.
.\"
.\" vmtools is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" ############################################################################
.
.Dd June 3, 2017
.Dt VMMERGE 1
.Os vmtools
.
.
.Sh NAME
.
.Nm vmmerge
.Nd merge parent and child virtual machines
.
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.
.Nm
.Op Fl hqvy
.Op Fl c | p
.Op Ar vmhome_path ...
.
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.
Merge a virtual machine into its parent or child.
.Pp
The details about the direction of the merge and its implication is described
in
.Sx Merge operating modes
below.
The default is to merge the virtual machine into its parent (equivalent to
.Fl p ) .
.Pp
.Ar vmhome_path
must be a valid virtual machine home directory.
If no value is provided, the current working directory is assumed.
.
.
.Sh OPTIONS
.
.Ss Merge operating modes
.
Merge operating modes are exclusive.
.Pp
If each affected virtual machine is organized as a subdirectory of its parent,
the directories are moved as required to reflect the updated parent-child
relationship.
.Pp
The merge method selection options are as follows:
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.
.It Fl c
Merge the virtual machine into its child.
.Pp
The virtual machine located in
.Ar vmhome_path
must have a single child.
.Pp
This method merges the storage and settings of the virtual machine located in
.Ar vmhome_path
into its child and then deletes it, moving the child as necessary.
If the original virtual machine had a parent, it now becomes the parent of the
child virtual machine.
.
.It Fl p
Merge the virtual machine into its parent (default behavior).
.Pp
The virtual machine located in
.Ar vmhome_path
must have a parent and be its only child.
.Pp
This method merges the storage and settings of the virtual machine located in
.Ar vmhome_path
into its parent and then deletes it.
If the original virtual machine had any child, they now become childs of the
resulting parent virtual machine.
.El
.
.Ss Other options
.
The other options are as follows:
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h
Show usage information summary then exit.
.
.It Fl q
Decrease verbosity.
Add several
.Fl q
options to decrease verbosity even more
.Fl ( qq
by default to get minimal output).
See
.Xr vmtools.conf 5
for more information about verbosity levels.
.Pp
See
.Fl v
to increase the verbosity level.
.
.It Fl v
Increase verbosity.
Add several
.Fl v
options to increase verbosity even more
.Fl ( vvv
by default to get the most verbose output, including debugging messages).
See
.Xr vmtools.conf 5
for more information about verbosity levels.
.Pp
See
.Fl q
to decrease the verbosity level.
.
.It Fl y
Don't ask any question: accept all confirmation requests and automatically
select the default answer in any other situation.
.Pp
Use this option with
.Em great care :
no confirmation will be asked before deleting or overwriting any files!
.El
.
.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev TMPDIR
Default location to store temporary files, by default
.Pa /tmp .
.
.It Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Location of user's configuration files, by default
.Pa ~/.config .
.El
.
.
.Sh FILES
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /usr/local/lib/vmtools
Libraries shared by the vmtools project utilities.
.It Pa /usr/local/share/vmtools/vmtools.conf
Virtual machine default settings, see
.Xr vmtools.conf 5 .
.El
.Pp
Moreover, the content of
.Pa /usr/local/share/vmtools
can be overridden in the following locations (in the order of precedence):
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It ~/.config/vmtools
User overrides (if
.Cm cfg_include_userhome
is set to
.Dq yes ) .
.It /etc/vmtools
System-wide overrides.
.El
.
.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.
.Bl -tag -compact -width Ds
.It 0
The operation ended successfully.
.It 1
An error occurred, incomplete tasks have been reverted.
.It 2
Wrong usage, nothing has been done.
.El
.
.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.
In the examples below, the notation
.Pa A/B/C
means that
.Pa B
is both a child virtual machine and a subdirectory of
.Pa A
and
.Pa C
is both a child virtual machine and a subdirectory of
.Pa B .
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Example 1: Parent merge (default behavior):
Invoking one of the commands on the tree
.Pa /A/B/C Ns :
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
.Ic vmmerge /A/B
.Ic vmmerge -p /A/B
.Ed
.Pp
These two commands are equivalent and merge
.Pa B
into its parent
.Pa A .
.Pa C
becomes a child of
.Pa A ,
producing
.Pa A/C .
.It Example 2: Child merge:
Invoking the command:
.Pp
.Dl Ic vmmerge -c /A/B
.Pp
On the tree:
.Pa /A/B/C
.Pp
Merges
.Pa B
into its child
.Pa C .
Here too the updated
.Pa C
becomes a child of
.Pa A ,
producing
.Pa A/C .
.El
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.
.Xr vmfork 1 ,
.Xr vminfo 1 ,
.Xr vmtools 7
.
.
.Sh REPORTING BUGS
.
Please send bug reports to the
.Lk http://github.com/WhiteWinterWolf/vmtools/issues "vmtools issues page" .
.
.\" ############################################################################
.\" ### /usr/local/share/man/man1/vmmerge.1.gz END
.\" ############################################################################
