.\" ############################################################################
.\" ### /usr/local/share/man/man1/vmmv.1.gz BEGIN
.\" ############################################################################
.\"
.\" Copyright 2017 WhiteWinterWolf (www.whitewinterwolf.com)
.\"
.\" This file is part of vmtools.
.\"
.\" vmtools is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" ############################################################################
.
.Dd June 3, 2017
.Dt VMMV 1
.Os vmtools
.
.
.Sh NAME
.
.Nm vmmv
.Nd move or rename a virtual machine home directory
.
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.
.Nm
.Op Fl hqvy
.Ar source destination
.
.Nm
.Op Fl hqvy
.Ar source ... directory
.
.Nm
.Op Fl hqvy
.Fl t Ar directory source ...
.
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.
Move or rename a virtual machine home directory.
.Pp
If two arguments are provided and
.Ar destination
does not exists yet,
.Ar source
will be renamed as
.Ar destination .
.Pp
Else, the last argument must be a writable directory and
.Ar source
will be moved as subdirectory of
.Ar directory .
.Pp
Alternatively, the
.Fl t
flag allows to pass
.Ar directory
as a separate option instead of the last argument.
.
.
.Sh OPTIONS
.
The options are as follows:
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h
Show usage information summary then exit.
.
.It Fl q
Decrease verbosity.
Add several
.Fl q
options to decrease verbosity even more
.Fl ( qq
by default to get minimal output).
See
.Xr vmtools.conf 5
for more information about verbosity levels.
.Pp
See
.Fl v
to increase the verbosity level.
.
.It Fl t Ar directory
Move all
.Ar source
virtual machine homes as subdirectories of
.Ar directory .
.Pp
This is equivalent of passing
.Ar directory
as the last command-line argument.
.
.It Fl v
Increase verbosity.
Add several
.Fl v
options to increase verbosity even more
.Fl ( vvv
by default to get the most verbose output, including debugging messages).
See
.Xr vmtools.conf 5
for more information about verbosity levels.
.Pp
See
.Fl q
to decrease the verbosity level.
.
.It Fl y
Don't ask any question: accept all confirmation requests and automatically
select the default answer in any other situation.
.Pp
Use this option with
.Em great care :
no confirmation will be asked before deleting or overwriting any files!
.El
.
.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev TMPDIR
Default location to store temporary files, by default
.Pa /tmp .
.
.It Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Location of user's configuration files, by default
.Pa ~/.config .
.El
.
.
.Sh FILES
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /usr/local/lib/vmtools
Libraries shared by the vmtools project utilities.
.It Pa /usr/local/share/vmtools/vmtools.conf
Virtual machine default settings, see
.Xr vmtools.conf 5 .
.El
.Pp
Moreover, the content of
.Pa /usr/local/share/vmtools
can be overridden in the following locations (in the order of precedence):
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It ~/.config/vmtools
User overrides (if
.Cm cfg_include_userhome
is set to
.Dq yes ) .
.It /etc/vmtools
System-wide overrides.
.El
.
.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.
.Bl -tag -compact -width Ds
.
.It 0
The operation ended successfully.
.It 1
An error occurred, incomplete tasks have been reverted.
.It 2
Wrong usage, nothing has been done.
.El
.
.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.
.Bl -inset
.It Example 1:
Rename a virtual machine:
.Pp
.Dl Ic vmmv ./oldname ./newname
.Pp
.It Example 2:
Move several virtual machines to a directory:
.Pp
.Dl Ic vmmv ./foo ./bar ~/trash
.Pp
.El
.
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.
.Xr vmcp 1 ,
.Xr vmrm 1 ,
.Xr vmtools 7
.
.
.Sh REPORTING BUGS
.
Please send bug reports to the
.Lk http://github.com/WhiteWinterWolf/vmtools/issues "vmtools issues page" .
.
.\" ############################################################################
.\" ### /usr/local/share/man/man1/vmmv.1.gz END
.\" ############################################################################
