.\" ############################################################################
.\" ### /usr/local/share/man/man1/vmps.1.gz BEGIN
.\" ############################################################################
.\"
.\" Copyright 2017 WhiteWinterWolf (www.whitewinterwolf.com)
.\"
.\" This file is part of vmtools.
.\"
.\" vmtools is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" ############################################################################
.
.Dd June 3, 2017
.Dt VMPS 1
.Os vmtools
.
.
.Sh NAME
.
.Nm vmps
.Nd report information on running virtual machines
.
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.
.Nm
.Op Fl hqrv
.Op Fl n | Oo Fl o Cm cdehmnpqu Oc Oo Fl s Cm CcDdEeHhMmNnPpQqUu Oc
.Op Fl a
.
.Nm
.Op Fl hqrv
.Op Fl n | Oo Fl o Cm cdehmnpqu Oc Oo Fl s Cm CcDdEeHhMmNnPpQqUu Oc
.Fl p Ar vmhome_dir ...
.
.Nm
.Op Fl hqrv
.Op Fl n | Oo Fl o Cm cdehmnpqu Oc Oo Fl s Cm CcDdEeHhMmNnPpQqUu Oc
.Fl p Ar pid ...
.
.Nm
.Op Fl hqrv
.Op Fl n | Oo Fl o Cm cdehmnpqu Oc Oo Fl s Cm CcDdEeHhMmNnPpQqUu Oc
.Fl u Ar user ...
.
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.
Report information on the currently running virtual machines.
.Pp
The
.Fl o
and
.Fl s
flags allow to select the
.Nm
fields to respectively output and use as sort keys.
See
.Sx vmps fields
below for more information.
.Pp
The expected arguments depend on the virtual machines selection method used.
See
.Sx Virtual machines selection options
for more information on the available methods.
.
.Ss vmps fields
.
The one-letter identifiers below can be used with the
.Fl o
and
.Fl s
flags to select vmps fields for output or as sort keys.
.Pp
Their uppercase counterparts can be used with
.Fl s
to sort in descending order instead of the default ascending order.
They cannot be used with
.Fl o .
.Pp
If no column has been explicitely selected for output, the default is
.Fl o Cm pnd .
.Pp
If no column has been explicitely selected as sort key, the default is to not
sort the output.
.Pp
The
.Nm
field identifiers are as follows:
.
.Bl -tag -width "A" -offset indent
.It Cm c
CPU activity (%): this value reflects
.Xr ps 1
.Cm pcpu
field which is loosely defined as follow in POSIX.1-2008:
.Pp
.Bd -filled -offset indent
The ratio of CPU time used recently to CPU time available in the same period,
expressed as a percentage.
The meaning of
.Dq recently
in this context is unspecified.
The CPU time available is determined in an unspecified manner.
.Ed
.Pp
The goal of this indicator is therefore more to get a rough idea of the
relative load caused by a virtual machines than to obtain any precise measure.
.Pp
This value may be empty if the local
.Xr ps 1
command does not support the
.Cm pcpu
field (this is notably the case on BusyBox-based environments).
.
.It Cm d
Display: this value indicates the virtual machine display method and URL (if
applicable).
The content of this field may be one of the following:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent
.It Cm disabled
Qemu display output has been disabled (the guest still has a graphical device
enabled).
.It Cm gtk
Qemu uses the GTK library.
.It Cm none
No graphical device has been enabled for the guest.
.It Cm sdl
Qemu uses the SDL library.
.It Cm spice:// Ns Ar address Ns Cm \&: Ns Ar port
A SPICE server is listening on the TCP
.Ar address
and
.Ar port .
.It Cm vnc:// Ns Ar address Ns Cm \&: Ns Ar port
A VNC server is listening on the TCP
.Ar address
and
.Ar port .
.Pp
If a VNC client expects a VNC display ID instead of a TCP port number,
substract 5900 from the TCP port number to obtain it (the port 5900 is
equivalent to the VNC display ID 0, the port 5901 to VNC display ID 1, etc.).
.It Cm \&?
The display mode used has not been recognized.
.El
.
.It Cm e
Command-line: display the complete Qemu command-line executed to start the
virtual machine.
.
.It Cm h
Virtual machine's home directory if it has one, otherwise this field is empty.
.
.It Cm m
Virtual memory allocated (KB): this value reflects
.Xr ps 1
.Cm vsz
field.
.
.It Cm n
Virtual machine's name if it has one, otherwise this field is empty.
.
.It Cm p
PID of the Qemu hypervisor process running the virtual machine.
.
.It Cm q
Qemu monitor socket: path to the socket file providing access to the Qemu
monitor shell, or empty if the virtual machine doesn't have a Qemu monitor
socket file.
.
.It Cm u
User owner of the Qemu hypervisor process running the virtual machine.
.El
.
.
.Sh OPTIONS
.
.Ss Virtual machines selection options
Each of these flags is exclusive.
By default
.Fl u Ev $LOGNAME
is assumed.
.Pp
These flags do not directly take an argument, but instead affect the arguments
expected by
.Nm .
.Pp
The virtual machines selection options are as follows:
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl a
Select the virtual machines from all users.
.Pp
This flag does not expect any argument to be provided to
.Nm .
.
.It Fl d
Select the virtual machines by home directory.
.Pp
When this flag is used,
.Nm
expects at least one virtual machine home directory to be provided as
command-line argument.
.
.It Fl p
Select by PID.
.Pp
When this flag is used,
.Nm
expects at least one PID to be provided as command-line argument.
.
.It Fl u
Select by user.
.Pp
When this flag is used,
.Nm
expects at least one username or UID to be provided as command-line argument.
.El
.
.Ss Other options
.
The other options are as follows:
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h
Show usage information summary then exit.
.
.It Fl n
Do not write anything on standard output, only use the exit code to determine
whether at least one running virtual machine matched the provided criterion.
.Pp
This option is not compatible with
.Fl o
and
.Fl s .
.
.It Fl o Ar vmps_fields
Select the columns to display.
.Pp
.Ar vmps_fields
is a combination of vmps field identifiers.
The identifiers order dictates the columns order in the output.
See
.Sx vmps fields
above for the list and description of the available identifiers.
.Pp
This flag can be specified only once.
.br
It is not compatible with
.Fl n .
.
.It Fl q
Decrease verbosity.
Add several
.Fl q
options to decrease verbosity even more
.Fl ( qq
by default to get minimal output).
See
.Xr vmtools.conf 5
for more information about verbosity levels.
.Pp
See
.Fl v
to increase the verbosity level.
.
.It Fl r
Raw list, do not display the column headers.
.
.It Fl s Ar vmps_fields
Select the sort keys.
.Pp
.Ar vmps_fields
is a combination of vmps field identifiers.
The identifiers order dictates the keys precedency.
There is no requirement to select for output the fields selected here.
See
.Sx vmps fields
above for the list and description of the available identifiers.
.Pp
This flag can be specified only once.
.br
It is not compatible with
.Fl n .
.
.It Fl v
Increase verbosity.
Add several
.Fl v
options to increase verbosity even more
.Fl ( vvv
by default to get the most verbose output, including debugging messages).
See
.Xr vmtools.conf 5
for more information about verbosity levels.
.Pp
See
.Fl q
to decrease the verbosity level.
.El
.
.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev TMPDIR
Default location to store temporary files, by default
.Pa /tmp .
.
.It Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Location of user's configuration files, by default
.Pa ~/.config .
.El
.
.
.Sh FILES
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /proc
When available, the
.Xr proc 5
pseudo-filesystem is used to fetch the Qemu processes command-line.
.It Pa /usr/local/lib/vmtools
Libraries shared by the vmtools project utilities.
.It Pa /usr/local/share/vmtools/vmtools.conf
Virtual machine default settings, see
.Xr vmtools.conf 5 .
.El
.Pp
Moreover, the content of
.Pa /usr/local/share/vmtools
can be overridden in the following locations (in the order of precedence):
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It ~/.config/vmtools
User overrides (if
.Cm cfg_include_userhome
is set to
.Dq yes ) .
.It /etc/vmtools
System-wide overrides.
.El
.
.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.
.Bl -tag -compact -width Ds
.It 0
Success: at least one of the selected virtual machines is running.
.It 1
An internal error occured.
.It 2
Wrong usage.
.It 3
None of the selected virtual machines is running, no result to display.
.El
.
.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.
.Bl -inset
.It Example 1:
List all users' running virtual machines, adding the username to the default
output fields:
.Pp
.Dl Ic vmps -o upnd -a
.Pp
.It Example 2:
An equivalent of
.Xr top 1
to monitor the global virtual machines activity:
.Pp
.Dl Ic watch vmps -o pumcn -s CM -a
.Pp
.It Example 3:
Obtain the home directory of a virtual machine from its PID:
.Pp
.Dl Ic ps -r -o h -p 1234
.Pp
.It Example 4:
Script snippet checking that every required virtual machine is indeed running:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if vmps -nd ./vm1 && vmps -nd ./vm2 && vmps -nd ./vm3
then
    # All virtual machines are running.
    ...
else
    # At least one of them is not running.
    ...
fi
.Ed
.Pp
.El
.
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.
.Xr vmdown 1 ,
.Xr vminfo 1 ,
.Xr vmup 1 ,
.Xr vmtools 7
.
.
.Sh CAVEATS
.
Providing the same virtual machine several times in the selection arguments
makes this virtual machine appear as many times in the output.
.
.
.Sh REPORTING BUGS
.
Please send bug reports to the
.Lk http://github.com/WhiteWinterWolf/vmtools/issues "vmtools issues page" .
.
.\" ############################################################################
.\" ### /usr/local/share/man/man1/vmps.1.gz END
.\" ############################################################################
