.\" ############################################################################
.\" ### /usr/local/share/man/man1/vmrndmac.1.gz BEGIN
.\" ############################################################################
.\"
.\" Copyright 2017 WhiteWinterWolf (www.whitewinterwolf.com)
.\"
.\" This file is part of vmtools.
.\"
.\" vmtools is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" ############################################################################
.
.Dd June 3, 2017
.Dt VMRNDMAC 1
.Os vmtools
.
.
.Sh NAME
.
.Nm vmrndmac
.Nd generate a random MAC address
.
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.
.Nm
.Op Fl h
.Op Ar prefix
.
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.
Generate a random MAC address.
.Pp
Such address can be used to manually update a virtual machine network settings.
.Pp
.Ar prefix
must be a valid prefix for the MAC address.
It must contain up to six groups of two hexadecimal digits separated by colons.
A final colon may be present or omitted.
It is not possible to break a group of two hexadecimal digits.
.Pp
Moreover, care should be taken for the address to be valid from a network
perspective.
It is recommended to use valid Organizationally Unique Identifier (OUI).
At the very least the multicast bit must be set to zero to avoid frames drop
and the locally administered bit should be set to one.
.Pp
Addresses fulfilling both of these recommendations have their first byte ending
with either
.Ic 2 , 6 , A
or
.Ic E
(see
.Sx EXAMPLES
below).
Addresses with the multicast bit set to zero have an even first byte.
.Pp
If no
.Ar prefix
is provided,
.Cm vm_networking_default_mac
is read from
.Xr vmtools.conf 5 .
.
.
.Sh OPTIONS
.
The options are as follows:
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h
Show usage information summary then exit.
.El
.
.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Location of user's configuration files, by default
.Pa ~/.config .
.El
.
.
.Sh FILES
.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /usr/local/lib/vmtools
Libraries shared by the vmtools project utilities.
.It Pa /usr/local/share/vmtools/vmtools.conf
Virtual machine default settings, see
.Xr vmtools.conf 5 .
.El
.Pp
Moreover, the content of
.Pa /usr/local/share/vmtools
can be overridden in the following locations (in the order of precedence):
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It ~/.config/vmtools
User overrides (if
.Cm cfg_include_userhome
is set to
.Dq yes ) .
.It /etc/vmtools
System-wide overrides.
.El
.
.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.
.Ex -std
.
.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.
.Bl -inset
.It Example 1:
Generate a random MAC address using the default prefix:
.Pp
.Dl Ic vmrndmac
.Pp
.It Example 2:
Generate a random MAC address with a fixed prefix (the first byte ending with a
.Ic 2
denotes a locally administered, unicast MAC address):
.Pp
.Dl Ic vmrndmac '12:34:ab:cd'
.Pp
.El
.
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.
.Xr vmtools.conf 5 ,
.Xr vmtools 7
.
.
.Sh REPORTING BUGS
.
Please send bug reports to the
.Lk http://github.com/WhiteWinterWolf/vmtools/issues "vmtools issues page" .
.
.\" ############################################################################
.\" ### /usr/local/share/man/man1/vmrndmac.1.gz END
.\" ############################################################################
